CHICKEN LITTLE LECTURE

Definitions are in order. First: Apocalyptic: this a religious world view orientated towards the end of time, or eschaton, and secondly, it is a genre of literature that articulates this world view. Tipically it is characterized by cosmic dualism, a focus on transcendence and a deterministic and pessimistic view of history. It makes extensive use of symbolism, emphasizes ecstatic experience as the source of revelation and identifies superhuman beings, devils, angels, etc. as agents of cosmic conflict, as literature it is usually pseudonymous, without identifiable authorship.

Second: Eschatology: This is the understanding of essential nature of existence in terms of its goals or destiny. Eschatology constitutes one element in practically all religious and philosophical thought systems. Some ambiguity in it may refer to the realm of absolute, or may point to events (Judaism and Christianity) that mark the goal of the historical process. In popular thought, it often is seen as describing the end of the age. Technically, the end of the age is the eschaton.

The development of these ideas in Judaism and later in Christianity appear to have a historical basis, though the dualism of Zorastorianism contributed concepts during the exile. During the time of the prophet Isaiah, around 700 BCE, the greatest power in the ancient world was Assyria. By the time of the birth of the prophet Jeremiah, around 630 BCE this power was clearly weakening. By the time Jeremiah was taken with other refugees into Egypt, about 585 BCE, the nation of Assyria had ceased to exist, the language had almost ceased to be used, and remaining traces of the culture were rapidly disappearing. Thus in the lifetime of one person, Jeremiah, and others living through this time of social change, a 1000 plus year old culture and power went from dominance to ceasing to exist. This was a great culture shock for the ancient world, use to the rising and fall of nations, but not to either the quickness or finality of the exit of Assyria.

Isaiah chapters 24-27, late Persian but apparently before Alexander the Great. The prophet is expecting the total reconstruction of reality, but within history, not in heaven or in a golden age in the past, but in this real world and to come through the power of God, as such power had already been seen in the return of the exiles and the vision of the re-established worship, only it shall be more complete as all peoples will be included and coming to Jerusalem, a theme found in Isaiah 40 and following, but carried to a much more massive and earthshaking end.

Alexander the Great, from 333 BCE to 323, conquered the known world, closing out many established systems and overturning the established order. The Greeks saw themselves as bringing civilization, the Jews saw this in theological terms. God was acting to totally change the order, and if God could act in this way, God could act to glorify Jerusalem.

Zechariah chapters 12-14. The Day of the LORD, characterized by "on that day" language. This day for Zechariah will be a day of change in history rather than philosophical or of out of history myth. The Jewish people had lived through the demise of Assyria, the exile under Babylon, the good rule of Persia allowing the end of the exile, and possibly Alexander the Great. On the day of the LORD another massive change with God's action to establish new order which would recognize special nature of Judah.
Certainly with Alexander the Great, this already present anticipation of world shaking change gained further momentum. Persian rule, possibly the most honest in the ancient world, overthrown by a much smaller army which according to the experts had no chance of success, somewhat like Lobo men taking NCAA. The Jews were more than innocent bystanders, they adopted events to fit their theology and vise versa, so it became required to interpret as God's hands in the events.
The goal of all Greek governments of the "successors" was to hellenize the populace, under Syrian Selucid reign, the Temple in Jerusalem was taken over by Antichois IV with a pig offered on the alter. (He had been whipped soundly by the Egyptians in battle and took out his anger on the rather defenseless Jews on his return towards Syria.) This is the "abomination of desecration" of Daniel, 1 Maccabees, Mark, and possibly II Thessalonians, the greatest insult to the Jewish faith since the destruction of the temple under Babylon 400 years before. It started the Maccabean revolt, successful for about 100 years before the Romans can in, and again, this was seen as God acting in history, with the world turned upside down, with Judah, as in the time of David, conquering nearby peoples and protected by Almighty God.

The expectation of another such event was general in the time of Jesus, with Caligula ordering his statute in the Temple and sacrifice of swine (not carried out as Caligula was killed first) in 40-41 (II Thessalonians??). This language was picked up by Mark chapter 13 during the siege of Jerusalem 66-70, though the temple was destroyed by Rome rather than just desecrated. After the debacle of 70 the Pharisees tended to minimize this language in the interest of self-preservation, but the continuity has had major influence on some parts of Christianity ever since. Whenever times are bad, cannot get worse, certainly God will take a hand, in a massive way, to set things right.

This expectation was very popular around the first millennium, 1000 CE, with expectation of Jesus' return, and again today, with social change, great wars such as W.W.I, W.W.II, the threat of Communism, the "BOMB', etc. When we feel our lives to be threatened or out of control, there is a temptation to place emphasis on God stepping in to set things straight.

Remember chicken little. It was not the sky but an acorn on his head. There are things beyond our control, but be wary of expecting history to repeat itself to our own satisfaction.

These themes of apocalyptic and eschatology are not central to either Judaism or Christianity, but they are popular with peoples considering themselves oppressed. Truly oppressed peoples, like the slaves in the South before 1865, were more in tune with the exodus and prophet calling for justice than this revolution in the social order where the "baddies" will certainly get theirs. Watch out for an almost vindictive picture of punishment (Dante) of those in social opposition to the "right" people who will be lifted to heaven to watch the events unfold on the Earth with primary emphasis of the punishment of their opponents. These themes, though from the Bible, are capable of a lot of self-projection where we show our own desires rather than the grace, power and love of God, in this interpretation of our anticipated outcome of events in history.
Since the first part of the lecture was written, some 4 years ago, new items in this area have developed which must be addressed. The key book for this is The Rapture Exposed by Barbara R. Rossing, a Lutheran seminary professor with Yale seminary and Harvard Ph.D.. The emphasis on the Rapture, not even mentioned in the Bible and as a concept currently in use, less than 200 years old, can be seen as perverting not only many of our churches, but influencing government actions in ways very negative to the tradition of the Bible. A Scottish chap by the name of Darby invented the millenarist system in 1830, with trips to the United States in the 1840's and 50's to sell it here. Moody Bible institute and similar fundamentalist groups bought the story, until now most of the religious TV is dominated by this theme, which has been rejected by all mainstream Christian groups, Protestant, Roman, and Orthodox. Dr. Rossing is giving a workshop for clergy at Ghost Ranch this summer, I believe already full, on dealing with this false teaching. In short, the theme is that the "right" Christians will be jerked out of the world in the Rapture while for seven years evil triumphs, then Christ is to return as King to bring punishment on those "left behind". It is very violence prone and totally rejects any concept of environmental concern as all is to be destroyed anyway. The view of creation, from Genesis 1, is totally absent, that God looked upon the creation and called it good. As one commentator has expressed it, the scripture has been changed to read: For God so loved the world that he sent World War III. In all of this there is the psychological sick idea that the chosen few (read me and those like me) are going to get to set up in the clouds enjoying the punishment being visited upon those left behind. There is a strong aspect of our current Middle East policy in this, with pressure to expect the Anti-Christ to come from Iraq, for Israel to hold all of the land occupied under King David, and most unchristian of all, to totally ignore the suffering of the Arab and particularly Palestinian Christians in their own lands.
There is not time to review the book or the position in detail, but it is a rabid and sick exaggeration of the chicken little concept, that the world is ending and I am going to escape all of the problems which will come on all those who do not have the secret knowledge which I do, almost a reversion to some form of Gnostic view, that the secret knowledge granted to the inside group will protect from the evil world and the terror to come. This is nonChristian in rejection the goodness of the creation. It is nonChristian in the exclusive nature of the "in' group when the Church struggled for years to established that all who are "in Christ" in the words of Paul are to be part of the new life. It is nonChristian in encouraging violence and war as appropriate goals for the acts of God. And all of this is supported by a system of "cut and paste" approach to the Bible which takes statements out of context and distorts to find what is desired without regard to the purpose of the scripture. All of our churches need to be educated and protected from this false and destructive teaching.
God's creation is good. God is love. God's grace is to be shared with all. God love the world so much that he sent his son into the world. Such is the true them of the Bible.
