Divisions within Islam Sunnis and shi'ah
.The Muslims were not adenuately orenar
and when it came it was a shock that almo '
community
ItstillattegaiMMIMm
Personal and tribal rivalries posed such obstacles to the choice. of a succerssor that there was genuine threat of civil war.
only a desperate act of acclaiming one of the number of their number khiqif~h or successor to the Prophet on the part of his. closest companions averted a disaster.
the man chosen was Abu Bakr, an intimate associate of
Muhammad and one of the early prominent converts from Makkah.
He was already old and after a reign of two years, died, passing on his authrity to the able and fiery khalifahs, Umar ibn al-khattab, the most brilliant of the rightly guided khalifahs, as the first successors to muhammad are known.
Umar was murdered by an assasin in 644 and was succeeded by another.
Uthman/ his successor, was murdered by a group of dissidents who accused him of corrupt rule, and his successor, the last of the rightly guided Khalifahs, Ali ibn Abi Talib, the cousin and son-in-law of Muhammad.
he was never firmly established in power and from the beginning his claims to rule were contested by a party who
uma	4-
d the infant
suspected him.of complicity in the murder of 'uthman.
It is this Ali that the Shi'ahs look back to as the rightful ruler. more on that later.'
Ali lost, after a protracted struggle, to Mu'awiyah who derived his support from Syrian tribesmen. b*:cause of this he set up his capital in Damascus rather than Madinah.
In spite of the violence and unrest that characterized the '
period, Muslims have always looked back to the pious caliphate as the time of Islam's greatest purity and glory.
The khalifahs themselves are among the most revered figures of Islamic history.
the accomplishments of the pious khalifahs were considerable.
first: of all they succeeded in maintaining the unity of the community in spite of break-away attempts by some Bedouin groups who considered thier loyalty to hav er been to Muhammad and to have been dissolved with his death.
second. they laid the foundations of a polity which kept the -
Arab armies intact in their camp cities and which provided means of governing the new territories.
third, and most important, were the great conquests themselves beginning under Bakr. In rapid succession the rich provinces of Syria, Iraq, Palestine and Egypt came under Muslim control. the great S'assanian Empire was brought down in 641 and the whole Iranian plateau was added to Muslim territories.
All the land which the muslims overran in their first great expansion, with the exception of Spain and portions of Central
2
Asia, has remained under Islamic control to this day.

today the greatest number of Muslims live outside the regions taken in the earliest conquests.
one of the later waves of expansion brought the faith to India in a decisive way, and although muslims have never been the majority there., the establishment of the Sultanate of Delhi in 1192 until 1857 they were rulers of a vast Indian Empire.
at present there are over 160 million Muslims found in India and Pakistan.
a still later wave of growth intoduced Islam to the Indonesi.on archipelago thru the agency of traders and wandering mystics by the 12th century.
in the 15th cent. the first important Muslim sultanate took form and today the mojority of Indonesioans, more than 100 million are muslims.
The Turks, who began to enter Islamic territories and the service of the rulers in 1 arge numbers in the 10th cent, subdued the vast region of Anatolia and Asia minor for Islam.
The Sal j uq Turks were the fist to establish themselves but eventually gave way to the Ottomans who at last ovetrthrew Christian power in Constantinople in 1453 and drove their armies from Eastern Europe.
at the height of their strength the Ottomans dominated the Balkan countries and sent an army to the gates of Vienna as late as 1683.
thus was another important region added to the domain of
3
Islam, and thp permanent influence of Islam on European soil established.
6 Swirl __
in a tradition popularly ascribed to the Prophet, Muhammad is alledged to have said: "my community will divide into
seventy-three sects of which only one is correct."
in fact, Islamic history has produced vastly more sectarian groupinas than the traditional number of 73.
a catalogue of the whole number of sects is impossible to give but on schism is of such importance that it must be discussed.
the Islamic community	-.t divi	0a romsomfe
(sometimes, and in possibly erroneously, called ,orthodox') and
the ShY'ah or shi/7te
Sunni muslims speak of themselves as the people of established custom and of the (genuine) community.
this terminology carries a connotation of positive judgement and amounts to a claim to be the living representatives and bearers of true Islam, of the practices, beliefs and expressions that have consistently characteri'zed the majority of the community throughout its history.
another way of explaining the Sunnis is to say that they see
traditionalists
themselves as the	of the communtiy.
they claim to maintain the ways established by pious men of
they could not see .n	aimAiFrri,	 old.
-
4
of the prophet as a leader	rather ak leader should be one who is
pious and can lead the people with religious authorit
such a concept of community provides a means for expanding the guidance to meet changed needs and conditions without compromising the fundamental belief in revelation.

In both Sunni and Shilh divisions	n


church end state	political ruler	is also a reli	
the Shi'ah
'MaMMmOigO date their origins from, at latest, the death of Muhammad and perhaps even earlier.


The word Shi'ah means	and the group got its name from
partYsonship of A!i
r
in the early struggles for leadership in the community.
those who f	! believed that succession t as ruler should remain within his family

of all Muhammad's family, Ali was clearly the most qualified.
the Shi'ah justified their position by citing traditions from Muhammad and even the Qur'an verses where the Prophet is said to have designated `Ali as his successor.
thus they opposed the election of the first three Khalifahs, whom to this day the Shi'ah consider usurpers; and after the short and unsettled reign of Ali, which was brought to an end by a Khawarij assassin in 661, they took up the cause of his sons,
Hasan and hussayn, as legitimate claiments to the leadership.
the	bY	J	yl	l } ______
its
the cousin and son-in-law of Muhammad,

5
tho there have been shi'i states in Islamic world, the
descendants of 'Ali were neverr successful in establishing rule

Khomani
for any length of time until	, who is.a 'black turben mullah and a direct descendent of All.
From the very beginning the political interests and calims of the Shi'ah were tinged by religious elements. even during Muhammad's lifetime there were individuals who paid a degree of respect to All that was nothing short of pious.


with time the religious concern of the Shi'ah strengthened and

producing many sects and exhibiting great richness
diversified,	r


particularly in theology and philosophy, but also in religious practice and piety.


gradually these more religious elements took the foremost

the political ambitions of the w~S	re frrudtrated
place as t


among the religious elements peculiar to the Shi'ah the most

passion motif
important are the	and the doctrine of the i mamah, which are closely interrelated.


The passion motif came into prominence arojnd the history of Ali's younger son, Husayn.


After 'A]i's murder, the Shi'ah looked to the elder son, Haasan, to take up his father's cause, but Hasan had no spirit for the struggle and resigned his claims to the caliphate.


thereupon Husayn, the younger brother, launched into a campaign against the Ummawis in which he was pitted against hopelessly superior forces.


ultimately he and his family were trapped by Ummawi troops and
6
killed in pitiable circumstances in southern Iraq.
This tragic event occurred on the tenth day of the month of
083 CE	the annual celebration of this
Muharrram in A.H. 61 I=WMMMMMb and
tragedy is the most important festival of the year for Shi'ah
	~	
Husayn's martyrdom and the great role it has played in 3hl`ah thought nransmmnon.
have introduced the elements of sorrow and suffering of the
	NillIMEWsaggaganftnagaMts
man unjustly killed
and of pious sacrifice into the shi'i strain of religious expression.

during the Muharram celebrations each year the story of
Husayn is repeated by preachers and storytellers and dramatized
in passion plays. the Shii march in processions where they exhibit symbols of
the slain martyr whel beating their breasts and wailing or engaging in self inflicted flagellation, cutting their heads, etc.

The occasion is one of great grief that purges the souls of the worshipers while at the same time it is cause for rejoicing in the salvation and guidance which Husayn^s noble self–sacrifice has bestowed on-the faithful.

this passion motif is not tied just to Husayn
the Shi'ah believe that all of their imams and other members
rather
of the holy family including the prophet himself have suffered martyrdom pt the hands of unjust men


n the passion plays, which often last for days, the history of these martyrdoms is traced.

according to the Shi'ah most of the imams haver died by -	7
poison' usually administered at the instigation of the khalifahs who usurped the imam's rightful place to rule.
an Imam means -leaderand can refer in Sunni circles to especially
learned men as in the case of the founders of the four Sunni .


schools of law, or certain other distinguished individuals. among the Shi`ah the word has a meaning far beyond the usual one.
upon Muhammad's death the Shiah believe that not only his function as ruler but also his rolse as reliigious guide devolved upon his descndants beginning with All.
The divine guidance did not stop with the death of the
~
prophet but was to be shed in the world throu h his family -
The series of visible imams, living openly in the world came to an end with the mysterious disappearance of the last imam.


for a time the imam retained contact with his followers thru representatives who had direct access to him, but soon even this was broken off.
The imam remains in the world byt remains hidden until *Oar	'
he will come again at the end of time as the imam Mohdl to establish -
the kingdom of God
learned men of the Shi'i community act as interpreters of the
the Imam	nce~ in the ozvzne will -for mm
.world at all times	the importance of the doctrine is
shown in the saying: "He who dies without knowing the imam of the age dies in unbelief."
8
The precise nature of the imam is understood differently by the numerous shi,ite sects, but the belief in the immamah is common
them	- and.istheir distinguishing characteristic
/~
..	.	,	^.	.	.	
~ 	. rnr tne more extreme xn/'ah the imam is considered as virtually '
an incarnation of God
there is a veritable indwelling of the divine spirii in the imam so that** in knowing him one experiences the full reality of the divine
presence in the world
vigirmizienpamesizatmessisoitasswusemigaw


should the imam ever be withdrawn, the entire order of reality would literally collapse because of the absence of its essential principle. this view is almost precisly parallel to the Sufi
understanding of the Putts or great saint around whom the whole order of reality turns.


At the other extreme of Shi'ah opinion the imam is considered
~
only to be inspired or divinly led, much as the Prophet himself


was.
great majority of Shi'ah
between the two extremes stand the 	
who hold a kind of doctrine of metempsychosis with respect to the imams.
understenJlng a spark of the eternal divine
wisdom
according to this
was implanted in Muhammad and upon his death was trans.lanted
wisdom ndenJng ~ spark of the	~	ne
into All and from thence into the series of his descendents whom God
has chosen '
thus tho there is an element of the divine in each of the .	``	.	. imams, there is not a complete indwelling as the more extreme
ghulat believe.

9
whichever is the case, the imam in Shi'i thinking has radical implications for the understanding of religious authority, for so
`	mam '
^g	is	ibnleeither personally/or thur his
~~~ess
representatives in the form of a learned man, there is a living source of guidance always at hand.
There are some differneces among the Shi`ah also about the numbher of imams and thier identity.
'there are those who accept a series of seven and those who accept a series of twelve.
kSeveners
they are called	or Isma'ilis (after the last imam
Toelvern
they recognize) andNIXISIMmEass or Ithna 'Ashariyah (Arabic for
"Twelvers")
generally speaking, the seveners have been more radical in their views than the Twelvers.
for a great part of Islamic history the seveners existed as sectret societies which, in the effort to spread thier creed among Muslims, engaged in revolutionary activities against established rulers and states, often, as in the case of the famous Assassins, using terrorism as one of their methods.
The seveners gained support with the rise of the Fatimi dynasty of Egypt (969-1174) whose rulers reckoned themselves in the line of descent from Muhammad ibn Isma'il, the last imam of the seveners.
it was one of the most brilliant eras of Islamic history with the founding of modern Cairo, the establishment of the famous al-Azhar univ. and many other feats.
10
there are numerous sub groups that continue to flourish at
vruz,	In /.v~
_ presnet time, among which are '--` ~-~ the u/~ p,~~oe~ c~me'g wv~c/` a,e ~nc~uoeo	~

hills of Lebenon
and±he-Nusayris of Syria~ most famous is	- '--. ~ "-~he followers of the Agha Khan, the majority of whom are found in ., India and the areas around the Indian Ocean.
these follow an esoteric teaching which one must be initiated in to undrstand. this is an elaborate philosophy influenced by Neo-platonism and Gnosticism.
they believe that everything in the external world represents on a small scale the realities of a spiritual and invisible world.
penetration beyond the external to knowledge of the spiritual realities is the aim of the teaching.
they are spread over agreat area with the majority Iraq
!ran
concentrated in population, and
where they are more than half the
subcontinent of India
and in the
Twelver Shi'ism had a great boost when in the 16th cent. the
Safawi dynasty in Iran chose to make it the official reli ion of
the state. aoftse

*it has continued this favored status and Iran is now the stronghold of the group.

altho the principle Shi'i shrines are located at Najaf and Karbvala in Iraq (the burial places of Ali and Husayn), Iran also
has holy places and centers of pilgrimage in Mashhad and Qum where greaat theological schools maintain the tradition f Shi`i learning and teaching The Shi'ah are distinguished from the Sunni' in other ways than just the doctrine of the imam.

There is a seperate and distinct Shi'i fiqh which recognized
/
completely different authorities from those of the four

'orthodox' Sunni schools.

the rules of law differentiating Shi'ah and Sunni are small being limited for the most part to minor details.

The greatest variation arises in jurisprudential theory bvecause of the preponderating role of the imam in Shi'i thinking and the continued Shi'i expousal of Ijtihad.

The shi'ah also have thier own distinctive collections of traditions such as the book entitled Al~Kafi the Sufficient One) by al-Kulayni (d. 939) and others.
the authorities for the Shi'ah bhat are recognized are not the same as the
Sunni
another important difference is in the area of theology. On the whole the Shi'ah have inclined in a far more rationalistic diection than has Sunni Islam.
Much of the doctreine of the Mu'tazilah was survived among the Shi'ah, and in their theological method they show a preference for rational argument above traditionalist views.
This inclination to rationalism accounts in large part for the great richness in philosophy, theology and speculative science 12
generally among the Shi'ah.
	'-} At various times in Islamic history ther	b	r
	conflict between	_ ..	^ .	. -	b.th olitical and, e.li•ious issues
this can happen especially at the time of the Muharrram celebrations when Shi ' i fervor is at it highest.
there has, however, been a determined effort to play down the differences and divisive effect of religious differences in light of the outside pressures of the west and of other idiologies.
Fundamentalist Islam
first a disclaimer. The Muslims don't even know the word fundamentalist and don't think of themselves that way.
rairo Egypt	Jihad
In	this group is known as	which means holy war.
these believe that they will eventually take over the world for Islam.
by the 11th century Cairo was the center for art and learning. the crusadors ended that but the tide is turned again. Egypt under Nassar and Sedat tried to become a modern state
with seperation of religion and secular i ntersts.


the Jihad wants to see Egypt as en Islamic state without an se.eration and where all laws are Islamic
	-4 	- 7	1
Jihad converts tend to be well educated, young and from lower middle classes—rural background, and high achievers who are dis-satisfied and easily converted to this view.
13
Even the Universtiy of Cairo is turning back to laws including dress codes for women, makeshift mosques in the school.
10 years ago only 10% of the women in Cairo wore the veil, now 70% have gone bace to wearing it.
Ism is the	a or reli Ion th t offer	ltiral wne
Nassar crushed militant moslems and in 1967 led Egypt into a war with Israel which lasted 6 days and was a devestating loss for Egypt.
this was seen by conservative Muslims as the judgement of
Allah. Sgd.t gave the public relations appearance of a devout Moslem but
it was a convienient cloak to keep the people happy.
He wanted Egypt to be in the mode of a western state and
invited in the west. he brought in hotels and industry but
nothing really important which could help the general populace. rather, his friends got rich and it became clear he was not
really caring for the people.
under Sedat Egypt became 2 nations:
1. the rich and elite imitating the west and
2. the poor who could not even be fed enough. Cairo had 14 million people, mostly poor
Islam became thier voice and most of the Jihad are young and militant who have been nurtured on horror stories of the west
14
In 1977 there was a riot in CAiro—Sedat had to back down so he made peace with Israel.

he did this because of a promise of the U. S. to give aid to
/
the economy.

he signed his own death warrent.

Sedat cracked down on protest of the Camp David accord and arrested thousands. imprisoned and tortured them.

when Jihad leader, Mohammad, was arrested it sealed Sedat"s fate. The leader's brother and the Jihad were responsible for Sedat's death
Mohammed was arrested again and is still in prison.

western culture is still going strong with gambling, dancing,

etc. ie, the seedier things of western culture. !s}am has become the opposition to the state
Sedat's successor, Hosni Mubarak, walks a tight rope. tries to be a pious muslim.
In Jan. 1987 Jihad tried to overthrow his government. many

were arrested but the underground is growing and plotting. Iran is seen as the ideal and the U. S. as the enemy
One

comment by a Jihad leader is that 'Islam is a tree that feeds on blood.	It will rule the world.
k Sunni movement
In Egypt the Jihad is a	but in Lebenon it is

Shi'ah and much more zealous.
Lebanon
Israel has been shelling border towns of Lebonon for years
15
~~
~~	)	trying to break their spirit.
it has done the opposite in binding the Shi'ah together. Because of their devotion to the martyrdom of Husayn, they are ready to die for what they believe.
only 12	15
Pelist!nYens
came into Lebenon in the early 70s and did not get along with the Shi'i, yet they were dragged into war with Israel.
The PLO Attacks on Israel were often retaliated by Israel by wiping out Shi'ah villages.
in 19V2 Israel poured accross the border to save Lebenon from the PLO.
at first they were welcomed but they marched on to Beirut (.	where they bombed civlians as well as the PLO.
the PLO surrendered and 14,000 fighters went into exile.
Israel stayed on in Lebenon with disasterous results. they earned more and more hatred from the Shi'ah Muslims.
It is Israel's vietnam.
As Shia'ahs resisted, Israel hunted youg men down and killed them.
this began the suicide missions used against the Israelis and they lost 600 men.
in 1985 the Israelies began pulling out becasue they ;,:ere beaten by their fanatical opponents.
There are two groups operating in Lebenon:

Ampl
the least radical is calle	which means hope.
16
^
it took on the Christian forces and won they hold at least half of Beirut.	°


Iran's influence is seen everywhere.


The 'Green Line' is the area seperating Christian and Moslem sectors and is the most dangerous area in Beirut.
Hlobollah
s means 'the party of God' and is much more fanatical


than Amal.
they want an Islamic republic like Iran. These are the ones who are taking hostages and who killed the 250 Marines in a suicide mission.


They are also the ones who hijacked a TWA and killed american passangers. in 1985.


their battle cry is "Allah Akbar" God is Great.
they want a world Islamic republic and believe one day they will have it.
