NATIVITY How can this be? Luke .1:34
Paul As of the first ,. ortanL.	15:3 raised on the third day

Mark the Spirit descen.	like a dove Mark 1:10.

John late The Word becate flesh John 1:14; already Pre
existence Phil 2: being of in human likeness Come to current traditions

Shepherds in the fiel. , lambing, season, early spring.	cot December, origin from Mithra birthday, cooped competition

From fi t, early church examined Hebrew scriptures for propheciesof Jesus, particularly since crucifixion most 'ignoble of deaths and certainly not expected of the Messiah
Matthew pushes limits of citations.- Matt. 2:18, applied to slaughter of innocents in Bethlehem,Ramah north of Jerusalem,
tribe of Benjamin instead of jndah/ Matthew uses anyway. Matt_ 2:23, Jesus from Nazareth, historically correct; but unknown quote of Nazorean, if Nazarite, which could be inferred totally in contradiction with record .forNazarte forbidden alcoholic beverages and one of criticisms of Jesus was that he enjoyed the party and the wine too mach.

Matthew quotes Greek of Isaiah 7:14, but makes no further elaboration than acknowledging apparently known fact that Mary and Joseph were not formally married at the time of conception. As is well nown. Hebrew of Isaiah. 7:14 reads "young woman" and applies to a pregnancy known to both Isaiah and the king at that time, that before the expected child is weaned, the international problems troubling the king will be solved.

Matthew best known for ,4	men. Of course Jesus called king, as the Messiah had to be of the house and lineage of David, and as such, claimed to be king. But by time Matthew writes, tradition of Jesus as a teacher, wise man himself, and, even revealemmof Wisdom is. well established. What more important recognition than visit from. the "establishment" of Wise Men at his birth, acknowledging him not only King to be but homage to Jesus for the Wisdom he was to bring to the world. We have been so pointed
on Jesus as King that this. part of the role of.the wise men has
been missed.

Micah 5:2 pointed back to David and .rward to any descendent correct in use here as Jesus of roya family'.
r
: Clearly Jesus	some of his disciples were followers John the Baptist before Jesus began his separate
teaching/preaching ministry	Separate followers of John remained
active for centutes, with some conflict in the first few hundred years. Luke giving space to John's family,but as subordnate is a smooth polemic towards the importance of john but the preeminence of Jesus. Luke's story of Zechariah and Elizabeth, age and childlessness, .clearly has similarities to Abraham and Sarah -with Isaac and the birth of the prophet Samuel . well.

Luke clearly understands Mary as a virgin, but place in contex.t, other religious traditions and even ancient secular ones, cite such, including the Buddha, Lao Tsu and Confucius in. China, Zoroaster in persia, Ra in Egypt, Prometheus, Plato, and even Alexander theGreat in Greece, Romulus and Remus in Rome, and Ouetzaicoatl in Mexico, among others. Again the question 'How Can This Be." Religious truth that is indescribable often clothes itself in stories designed to startle us-and make us pay attention. Once this story gets our attention, then amssk
this mean-to me, for this story is packe with meaning regarding who Jesus i	who is the Messiah,	ae Incarnation, the
,vine is manifesting fully in a human being. As the congregation in Philii	sang, "being born in human 1ikene8s" Birth narrative an explanation of experienc of Emmanuel, Go with us, which was experience of the faith community.

The shepherds, sheep., but consider Ezekiel 34 of last week, promise of God. feeding Israel but also of sepherds, these shepherds (of people rather than sheep) come to honor the new Savor Mssiah who will be .;he chief shepherd for all of Israel* Shepherds, biblical term for the leaders of. the peo coming to honor Jesus points to him supplanting traditional shepherds of. the people with the new Ring,

Infancy Gospel of James from mid 2nd cent, source of most popular additional stories of the birth, emphasizing Mary. Uses Matthew and Luke, but with changes. Joseph, in Canonical later married to Mary, here an old widower with grown sons who keeps Mary aS ward. Mary virginity is permanent even after Jesus' birth in this atcount, even verified by midwives. Similar to birth. of John the Baptist in Luke is Joachim and Anna, birth of Mary late in life, and according to this late infancy Gospel, Anna became pregnant by power of Holy SPirit, not normal means: Mary to temple at age 3, similar to Samuel story. As adolescent, spent time spinning thread for the temple with other virgins, hence the art. work showing her spinning which is so common in annunciation scenes. Birth in cave on way to Bethlehem, manger picked up as hiding place during Herod's search for babes to kill in stead of tr.ip toEgYpt, Elizabeth hides John the Baptist the same time inside.~ -mountain. Whole panOrama of incident, picked up by Christianity which are never recorded in the canonical texts and are clearly later."
