Lecture #11
WISDOM LITERATURE / PSALMS

Wisdom Literature:
out of this fertile mileau comes the form known as wisdom literature, which from its beginning was international.
collections of proverbs in both Egypt and Babylon predate Moses, and probably even Abraham.

the compilation of these wisdom sayings and sharing of these was an international activity.
for example Prov. 2217-24:22 is lifted verbatum from the Egyptian "Instruction of Amen-em-ope" which may be older than 1000 BCE,

Wisdom literature falls into two classes,
first, consists of practical advice to the young on how they may attain the successful and good ]ife^ this is illustrated by the above mentioned section of Proverbs.
second consists of the reflective probing into the depth of human anguish about the meaning of life, often in a skeptical
m000
~
this can be illustrated in the biblical books of job and Ecclesiastes.

the three wisdom writings in the Hebrew Bible are Proverbs, Ecclesiastes and job.
there are a number of poems, now included in the psalter or the prophetic collections, which apparentlyh came from the wisdom literatOre of Israel.
outside the Hebrew Bible there are a number of wisdom books included in the Roman Catholic and Orthodox bibles.
These are Ben Sira, (dating from the early 2nd cent. BCE), the Wisdom of Solomon (1st cent. BCE).

Altho much of the Widsom literature was produced in the
post 	exilic period when Israel was deeply conscious of being a worshipping community, there are strekingly few refrences to acts of worship, and what few there are say little of the centrality of worship.

the personal name of YHWH is not used in Ecclesiastes or, with a couple exceptions, in job.
even when the name is used in Proverbs, there is nothing made of the special relationship between YHWH and Israel.
there are no explicit allusions to Israelite history or to outstanding Israelite personalities, except Solomon
the prophets were critical of wisdom at times (see Is 29:14; Jer 8:9) and indication that the movement was strong enough to warrant their attack.
in fact, the "Wisdom tradation in Israel pre-dated and outlasted the prophetic movement, and reached its peak only after prophecy had declined.
The basic	&of wisdom literature is "accept life as you find it."
it startsawhere life is not where it should be.
Its a pragmatic declaration of Godhas given us this world, take it where it is--it speaks of upper class group who don't want change.
Israel regarded Solomon as the fountainhead of her widsom, just as the Pentatuch is ascribed to Moses, and the Psalms to David.
the idea that YHWH had bestowed wisdom upon Solomon in answer to his "Deuteronomic° prayer (I kings 3:3-14).
it was believed that yHWH bestowed wisdom upon the sage, just as he gave torah to the priest or put his "word" into the mouth of the prophet.
the sage turned to the everyday scene, rather than the historical drama of Israel, to gain wisdom.
&S	ILLi-E and
the "Song of Songs° contains "the sweetest" of Solomon's songs'
about 25 of them. there Is no indiooqon that Solomon composed these but their association with him and their popularity.
~~
at wedding festivities established them so-firmly in Israelite life that eventually they were admitted to the rank of sacred scripture, on the ground that the songs present an allegory of the covenant love between YHWH and his people.

S of S 6:13 Shu'lammite-refers back to Ischar, the Goddess of love
Hellenistic notions of a dualism of "body" and "soul" find no support in the Hebrew Scriptures, certainly not in the Song of Songs.
[g~~~b~ !th~ bggk}
the history of Israel's wisdom movement is condensed in the book of Proverbs. it is generally agreed that this book in its final form comes
after the time of Ezra, when the wisdom schools were flourishing but it represents the final stage of a tradition that goes back to the time of Solomon, who may have composed and/or collected the original nucleus.
there are several seperate collections or books within the book of Proverbs, along with some appendixes.

chaP 1-9 are regarded as the latest with the next 12 chapters (10-22) as the oldest.
all that can really be said is that the Book represents a complex tradition, extending thruout almost the whole of the O. Test. period.
thg glgQy


the sage suggests that the good life can be won thru diligence, sobriety and prudence, and that the marks of the good life are success, well-being and a long a fruitful life.


in this way, God and success are equated. there is no way to m
account for failure other than to say is is sin.


this same view found in the Deuteronomic history with its basic theme of rewards and punishments built upon the Mosaic covenant with its curses and blessings.
the sages of Israel came out with a similar view.
the convergence of these two points of view, which rested upon divine initiative and human inititive respectively, eventually prompted the identification of Torah with Wisdom in Israel's history of tradition.
this, of course, is the basis of most the health/wealth gospel which says if you follow these teachings you will be healthy, wealthy and wise.
Th~ FE n gf thELgEd is the beginning of wisdom, idea occurs several times in the Hebrew scrip.
this concept means that faith is the precondition of understanding.
this theme is unique in the wisdom of Israel.
Hosea emphasized that Israel's lack Of "knowledge of God" was the fundamental flaw in her history.
Jerimiah also contrasted true wisdom with folly (Jer 9:23-24)

The New covenant, according to both Jeremiah and Ezekiel, would introduce a new time, when Israelites would "know YHWH, from the least to the greatest.
also, the theme of "the fear of the Lord" ,which was central to the wisdom tradition, was deeply ingrained in Israel's


i~dg. the last section of the book was chap 1-9 and comes from a teacher of the 3rd or 4th Cent. BCE who was probably the final editor of the book.
the important thing here is that he personifies wisdom (sophia) as a prophetess who speaks proclaiming her own worth, rewards and authority and, most important for later Christian theology, her primacy in the creative work of God.
she was "the first born of all creation" a pharse later applied to Jesus in Colossians 1:15-16; and in john 1:1-3, where the greek term logos, meaning wisdom or word, is made male and used to describe Jesus.
origanilly tho, wisdom was female.

nevertheless, the. search for wisdom divides people into two catigories, the wise and the foolish, the rightous and the wicked.

the same weakness is here as is in the Deuteronomic idea of good vs evil. in reality, it doesn't work that way.
this confidence in the human quest and fear of YHWH leading to the long prosperous life was challanged by the book of Ecclesiastes.
unlike Proverbs, is is fundamentally the work of one sage who wrote during the late post-exilic period, perhaps between 250 and 180, probably closer to 180 BCE.
he gave a bold challange to Judaism and its simplistic Deuteronomic view which offended the sensibilities of the orthodox.
as a result, the book was "touched up" to make it
palatable,.
one disiple added an appendix in 129-11, praised the sage for his genius in weighing, studing and arranging proverbs.
but another editer, who wrote 12:12-14 cautioned the reader to take the teaching with a grain of salt.
according to this editor, the fundamental tenent of Judaism still stands unscathed in spite of the book's teaching

had it not been for these pious revisions, and the tradition that Solomon wrote the book, it is doubtful if it would have been accepted in the Hebrew Canon

The hebrew word for the book is ggh~leth which is rendered, loosely, the preacher
it is not a proper name but a description of a function the world is not a sermon but rather a rambling lecture on
the meaning of life given by a professional wisdom teachern
the thesis of the lecture, announced at the beginning and again at the end, is that all human activity is vanity and a striving after the wind.

th~2lg~i~~l i.t	t.ti..
he is clearly influenced by Greek culture but he never surrenders the conviction that God is sovereign over human affairs, even with his targic sense of life.
the problem is not as in the Greek, that fate has control of both men and gods, but rather, that God's wisdom is so incrutable that, from the human point of view, life has no rhyme or reasonn
since man can't know God's ways, it seems everything happens by chance and seems like the days turn in a circle rather than toward a fulfillment of purpose: "there is nothing new under the sun."

7:15ff- according to him, the doctrine of the two ways, wisdom and foolishness, doesn' ring true for the rightous are rewarded with suffering and the wicked are chastened with successn
thus, he recommends moderation in both wisdom and folly, for co	tlmuch of either may lead to disaster.

thg vuEQg5E gf
in chap 5 he discusses the convention of keeping things in order, pay your vows but don't practice ignorant piety
7:25 sin is foolishness, irrational, not breaking the law.
he develops a new idea of sin and sinner.

7:2-29 a woman will trap a man if he's a fool--to be a sinner is to fanticize-	what's wrong with eroticism and love? ans: it leads to a world of fantasy

good then, is things that are rational--anything that leads to rationality is good.

The basic tenent of his theology is that God is hidden
Qoeleth writes withen the shadow of despair
for him God is transcendent, completely other, seperated from Man by an infinite gulf (5:2).
no other writer puts more emphasis on the soyerignty of God.

The book is a vigorous repudiation of the claim that traditional wisdom can discern the purpose of G:id.

comparison:
in Prov. 2 fear of the Lord, knowledge of God, gives wisdom. If you follow the covenant all will go well.
its written into the universe, cause and effect. If I know what relgion and the world are about I will understand God . tig[Igl g[li'2gE .~
6~~/~~ ~`^^	/ '
in Ecclesiastes ~ God gives busy work--work of God is work that we do but irrelevant.
must fear God by submitting to what he does to us
(suffering our task is enduring what he gives and being busy with
work--i[[tigD~l

Eth
for Prov., one overcomes violence by the law of the Lord. virtue is coping with that problem by learning aporisms of the wise and doing them.

for Qoeleth evil is doing passionate deed--self assertion. virtue is being aware of how manipulated wer are and then one
-won't assert oneself. once you realize your not in control then
your not bound to get or do things.

human acheivment is impossible.--cyclic view of history
JOB
the prologue (1:1-2:13)and the epilogue (42:7-17) were additions to make the book more "pious" and were written in prose, as opposed to the poetry of the rest of the book.

chapter 28 is also inserted and is a hymn to wisdomwhich has nothing to do with the story.

it is basically a folk tale of a rightous man who is tested and takes place in Edom and may have been written by an Edomite but this is irrelevant;
it is probably a late post-exilic work
Ezekial mentions job totgether with Daniel as legendary wise and rightous men. (Ezek 14:14, 20).

Thf2glggy
without giving detail of the story it is about a rightous man who suffers, loses all he has, is made sick.
three friends try to give him council and all fail (they represent the various religious attitudes).
finally, he argues with God and is told by YHWH that he has presumed to know to much.

Job is shown that his religious quest is motivated by a Prometean defience and YHWH reminds him 'that the first religious obligation of the creature is to acknowledge and glorify the creator.

Job is silenced and admits he has no ground for arguing with God


along with his confessin of the sin of self-sufficiency went a new consciousness of relationship with God--not the God of traditional religion, but "the Living God."

the k;2y, to the book of job is his EEEtEtg .~~.
in response to the voice from the whirlwind, he moved from his egocentric attitude, in which he spught to justify himself by condemning God, (40:8) to a humble awareness of his place in God's creation.
from the very first the fundamental issue is Job's relationship to God.
thus Job moved from a relationship of self sufficiency to one of trust and personal faith
hy repudiating the smug orthodoxy of his friends, he was open to receive the gift that God bestows on those who seek him.

the mystery of suffering is left unanswered for the crux of the human problem, according to Israel's faith, is not the fact of suffering but the character of Man's relationship to God

Job stands over aganist covenant theology
it is trying to answer the question of why Israel was exiled and dominated and impoverished?
wisdom's answer is if the world were rational, it wouldn't have happened, thus the world is irrational and the question
,
souuldn't be asked.
many innocent are caught up in a corporate disaster but it :isn't a problem because punishment and reward are not valid catigories.
experience happens to us and don't need to be explained.
we don't have to prophcy future victory to justify problems now.

Job is a response to the prophetic outlook saying religion doesn't explain to us everything that happens. he is seperating the secular from the religious realm
there is value to private religion but has no social relvance. what happens to us as a nation doesn't come under religious
explanation. history is neither the result of a covenant or of rightousness.
since job stands against covenant theology then:
1. national birht was purely a natural, human event.
2. the existence of the nation is not related to rightousness or unrightousness.
3, if there is to be a final day of judgement we have no way of knowing about it so must live in a de-mythologized world.

Job stands as a corrective to a late apocylyptic view of history.
10	f'4~~
/i,n 5
.~ _,
ThT	~ HzTDbggk gf th. Eg .g~d

the psalter is basically a condensed account of the whole drama of Israel's history with God from the time of David down to the' late post-exilic period.

the problem is that it is practically impossible to deal with the Psalms in their proper historical `periods or life-situations.

except for psalm 137 which presupposes a situation in the Babylonian exile, the content of particular psalms syas very little aboutn the time and circumstances of thier composition.

thus we must begin with the fact that they were compiled for use in the 2nd temple which was completed in 515 BCE.

the Jewish tradition is that there are 150 psalms, even tho the Greek Orthodox bible contains 151.
The history of Israel was fundamentally through all social changes and historical vicissitudes, as a worshiping community.
this is why Psalms lies at the heart of the Hebrew
15
Scriptures.
the religion of the Psalms, it is being realized more and
more, was "Cultic".--ie, it is the faith of the community at worship, especially on ocassions of festivals even the psalms of lament were collected~ao-~
worshipping community.

it has to be realized that the idea of individual piety was as	to Israel who believe that Israel is related to G
s part of a community,	God only the book of Psalms in its present form is the product of the post-exilic community of Israel.
this process of completion took place in several stages extending from the 4th to the 2nd cent. BCE.
it is made up of 5 collections or	"books" eanc concluding
with a doxology.
Book I	Psalm 1-41
Book II	Psalm 42-72
Book	III	Psalm 73-89
Book IV	Psalm 90-106
Book V	Psalm 107-150
the fivefold arrangement seems to be patterned on the five books of the Torah.
16
73 of the Psalms are attributed to David but there is no way this can be so
however, there is no question that some of them may go back to David and the association of David with the psalter is similar to the association of Moses with the Pentatuch.

in fact it is accepted today that a great number of the psalms that reflect the official, pre-exilic worship of Israel.
~~5.4^e/ _	~,
~	~~~~
litt n Eny g~= R
5;
there are trec:	r catigories of psalms.
first is th	n which the worshipf)ing	mmunity prlaises God or who he/is and w~at he has done.
econd is! the lament (or petition) which pref:upppses }
froblemat~c situaticn in which God's soverelInty is temporarily /
clipsed.
)ird is/ the thankf:igiving whici expresses praise for deliverance overlaps with hymns.


vestiges of earlier worship and from other cultures, particularly canaanite, are found.
for example, YHWH as a rider of the clouds is some psalms is clearly taken from some hymns proclaiming Baal as rider of the 17
clouds.

there were many other psalms written including the Psalms of Solomon dating from 150-50 BCE, many found with the Dead Sea material

the Ode5 gf Sglgm g~ which may date from the early Christian era, are songs praising God for his presence.

to conclude this intertestamental time I simply want to recall the influence from Persia (Iran)

Zg[gEt.. was active during the 7th cent BCE with the idea of a dualism between light and dark, Satan (ahiramin) and demons, angels and the concept of resurrection from the dead.
these all came into Judaism after their contact with PerSia (except for the Saducees)
they became very important for later Christian thinking which essentially grew out of the apocalyptic genre.

the canon was decided at the Cg~~. Li gf JAmpi2 in 91 C.E, after the church and synagoge had split.
Scholarship of the Psalms: Form Criticism Gunkel, Mowinckleand Westermann
Hermann Gunkel's contribution to contemporary understanding of the Psalms began with a classification of the Psalms into types. Working through a liturgical framework, Gunkel sorted psalms into eight categories and one group of miscellaneous. Here are Gunkel's categories with a few illustrations for each type.

Hymns are calls to the community to praise God in worship; these are illustrated by Psalms 145-150, but also include Songs of Zion (46) and Enthronement Hymns (96-99).

Community Laments remind the community stand in humility and repentance before God; worshipping laments are expressed in Psalms 44, 74, and 79.

The Royal	Psalms celebrate an outstanding moment in the
royal life; see Psalms 2, 20,72, 144.

Individual	Laments	are	the	prayers	of	particular
worshippers; consider Psalms 5-7.

Individual Thanksgiving	Hymns are songs thanking God for
protection, deliverance or particular blessings; Psalms 30 and 32 are good examples

The Pilgrim Songs written for the company of pilgrims are their way to Temple in Jerusalem; good examples are 84 and 122.

Community Thanksgiving focus on a national event through which the people have experienced God's aid and blessing; for a good harvest, Psalm 65 and for success against foes, Psalm 124

Songs of Wisdom are the teaching songs that offer proverbial guidance in deciding between the ways of the righteous and the ways of the wicked; these are well illustrated by Psalms 37 and 73.
In "The Message of the Psalms" Walter Brueggemann (Augsburg Old Testament Studies, 1984) continues the study of the Psalms according to their expressive language. By listening carefully to the rhythms, metaphors, descriptive phrases Brueggemann has divided the Psalms into three categories:

Psalms of orientation Psalms of disorientation Psalms of new orientation


Psalms of orientation sing of the constants in creation and the dependability of the Creator. One might consider these the songs of foundation for they express how the human soul has learned to trust God. In these psalms the waters are calm, chaos has been subdued, and the world is a safe and secure environment. Emphasis is on the regularities of life as experienced through the reliability of God.'

Examples are: 1, 33, 112, 133, 145.

Psalms of Disorientation cry out in the darkness. These are the songs born in agony, distress, and grief. Often the psalms of disorientation express anger toward God; God is both the cause and the potential cure of disorientation. In seasons of disorientation it is a oddly faithful activity to sing to God.

Examples are: 13, 35, 73, 130, 137.

Psalms of	New Orientation make bold statements of faith.
Although disorientation has shattered the original (and untested) trust in the reliability of God, now the song is full of the new possibilities which God has created. Out of
darkness has come light. Disease has turned into health. The human soul has been lifted up from the pit and set within a spacious land. All is amazing. All is mysterious. All is testimony to the God who creates something new!

Examples are: 23, 30, 96, 103, 1381 1.7.60.4'4 1'137' 9
